\section{Introduction}
Once, when traveling, I arrived at Heathrow airport quite late. My
plane had been delayed and it was some while after midnight that I 
finally made it to the front of the queue at customs. I was working
in England at the time and required a visa to enter the country.
The visa meant answering a pretty standard battery of questions each
time I returned from abroad. I will reproduce my exchange with Heathrow's
border security in full:

"How do you qualify for this visa?"

"Maternal Grandmother."

"Where do you work?"

"In a materials science department."

"What do you do?"

"Research"

"What in particular?"

"Condensed matter physics."

"What is that?"

"Well, I suppose it is the physics of matter" then realising
the circularity of this definition I amended it and said:
"It is the physics of the solid state."

At this point the man questioning me stopped and looked up from his computer. 

"There are no solids.", he said, "only space and energy." He then 
chuckled, returned my passport, and told me I was free to enter the country.

To this day I don't know if he was joking or not. Although I suspect not, and I am
of the opinion that there is an english border guard of asian descent, possibly retired now, 
with a deeper intuitive sense of the secrets of the material universe than most professors
of the subject.

Perhaps being jealous of the calm certainty with which the guard
commanded the subject I thought it might be appropriate for me
to develop my own idea of what exactly materials are and how they work.

First some bad news. I am afraid that the discussion still requires a fair amount of mathematical formalism
to be introduced. The economy of expression afforded by mathematics can't be beaten.
So with this paragraph consider yourself forewarned. I also do not intend to posit strange metaphors to
attempt to explain how certain equations behave. Though the consequences of certain derivations 
will be discussed and the relevance of their inclusion hopefully justified.

The good news is there will be pictures. Wherever there is alot of math there 
should be a picture that captures, schematically, the essential ideas which is referenced in the text. 
It turns out that for most of materials science the most important pictures always seem to be ones showing you
how the atoms are arranged in space, and graphs showing you where a resonance is likely to occur. 
Resonances, peaks in spectra, are typically what turn up in experimental
probes. In a strict sense of the words we shine light on materials to try to understand how they work. 

\section{Electronic Structure for Materials Science}

In 1987 Henry Ehrenreich published an article in Science called
"Electronic Theory for Materials Science". The article begins
with what might now be considered a bold statement:

\begin{quote}
Theoretical Materials Science remains to be invented as a discipline,
and for good reason.
\end{quote}

The reason he supplies is that materials processing, historically, was a craft. 
A roman engineer knew that a pinch of gypsum could significantly 
impact the properties of the concrete
produced. A Blacksmith learned that swords and shields were 
effected by the alloying of the metals and careful control of heat: 
firing the blade then quenching the blade in cold water.

Each element in its atomic form is identical to every element of the same kind,
yet it is difficult to formulate, mathematically, a description applicable 
to that same atom in all its potentially different environments. 

The properties of an atom as it stands alone, perhaps sitting in a 
vacuum, is in some ways completely different from the same atom 
surrounded by copies of itself, and there are changes again
in the collective properties of the material when that atom is 
surrounded by different neighbour atoms.

So we now have developed two important arguments. Electronic structure
is a theory of the local environment, the effects depend on nearest
neighbours and swapping atoms in and out of a crystal matrix will 
effect local properties but not general ones. Secondly, 
tiny variations in the material composition
produce dramatic effects across macroscopic length 
scales completely altering the properties of the material.

These two proposition seem to be at odds.

Cottrell noted that metallurgy would require a "theory... which explains
the properties of metallic solids and the explanation of the origin of this
structure from the strutures of individual atoms." 

Let's go back to Ehrenreich he posits four interesting points
about what priorities and constraints shape the field of material
science:
%
\begin{itemize}
\item i) theory must be closely linked to experiment
\item ii) ab initio calculations without approximations are virtually impossible except in model systems
\item iii) approximations are frequently based on prior experience rather than on theoretical justification
\item iv) the study of trends in the properties of homologous materials is a crucial ingredient of a credible theoretical framework.
\end{itemize}
%

Keep in mind this paper was written in 1987. It is worth considering how the intervening
30 years has rebalanced priorities. Start with point (ii). The constant development
of computing capacity and computer programs means that ab initio calculations
are now standard. The methodological developments underpinning this, 
largely density functional theory, pseudopotentials, various numerical algorithms
for computing the eigenstates of electrons in material systems and standardized 
computational packages for performing these calculations did not exist in their
present state. Looking at the citation metrics, foundational papers in the subject
of DFT and methods number their citations in the tens of thousands,for the 
theoretical and algorithmic improvements improvements are sufficient testament 
to the reach and fundamental nature of ab initio calculations.

The cost of the uniquity of access to ab initio data has come to point (i) 
and the acceptance of this comes from point (iii). Again cursory surveys of 
the literature, APS journals PRB, J Phys. Cond. Matt. demonstrate the frequency
of publications which contain no original experimental work. 

This is partly down to the high level of specialization of 
contemporary researchers and research groups. Previously the distinction between
a materials scientist and theoretician was not so dramatic. In addition many
important theoretical developments came from the context of attempting to explain
a particular new set of experimental data.

Perhaps most famously the emission spectra of hydrogen and the michelson morley 
experiment motivated developments in quantum theory and special relativity.
Subsequent theoretical developments follow the same pattern:
Bethe's calculation of the lamb shift, recursion work on the magnetic moment of FeAl_{3}
are two specific examples that come to mind.

\section{Waves and Particles Again}
Whether your interest in quantum mechanics is limited to popular science descriptions
or you have studied the subject formally the discussion will invariably and at an
early stage touch on waves and particles and the dual wave-particle nature of 
particles when things get very small. 

The frustration of talking about waves sometimes and particles other times 
never really goes away. It is a little bit like the frustration of reading
Isaih Berlin's essay on the fox and the hedge hog. The beginning of the essay
seems promising as Berlin classifies all writers as either foxes or hedgehogs 
based on their qualities and work. However having listed a great number of foxes and
hedgehogs he claims that Tolstoy is a hedgehog who wished he was a fox and the whole 
situation is once more confused. 

Just when you though you could understand all literature in terms of foxes and hedgehogs
along comes a fox that wishes it was a hedgehog, or vice versa. And just when you thought
you knew what a particle was and what a wave was you can once more be frustrated.

That waves diffract is essential to understanding their properties and if we have
electron waves

When the wavelength of an electron in a crystal:
%
\begin{equation}
\lambda = \hbar/\k,
\end{equation}
%
is comparable to the inter atomic distance $a$ there is going to be diffraction.
A lot of theoretical condensed matter physics, and increasingly applied materials science,
is concerned with calculating the way electrons
scatter off of atomic sites and these diffracted waves result 
in the piling up of electronic charge in crystals. The problem is additionally
complicated because the electron waves also need to scatter off each other. 
Two electrons will act on each other via the Coulomb interaction and the matter
waves will scatter accordingly.

