\section{Introduction}
Once, when traveling, I arrived at Heathrow airport quite late. My
plane had been delayed and it was some while after midnight that I 
finally made it to the front of the queue at customs. I was working
in England at the time and required a visa to enter the country.
The visa meant answering a standard battery of questions each
time I returned from abroad. I will reproduce one particular exchange 
with Heathrow's border security in full:

"How do you qualify for this visa?"

"Maternal Grandmother."

"Where do you work?"

"In a materials science department."

"What do you do?"

"Research."

"What in particular?"

"Materials science."

"What is that?"

"Well, I suppose it is the physics of condensed matter or the physics of the solid state."

At this point the man questioning me stopped and looked up from his computer. 

"There are no solids.", he said, "only space and energy." He then 
chuckled, returned my passport, and told me I was free to enter the country.

To this day I don't know if he was joking or not. I suspect not. 
I am of the opinion that there is an english border guard of asian descent, possibly retired now, 
with a deeper intuitive sense of the secrets of the material universe than most professors
of the subject.

The encounter made me think I should develop my own ideas of 
what exactly material science constitutes to the same 
level he had clearly done.

First some bad news. I am afraid that the discussion still requires a fair amount of mathematical formalism
to be introduced. The economy of expression afforded by mathematics can't be beaten. 
Most of the mathematics will be fairly accessible to anyone who has studied
calculus and linear algebra. I am of the opinion though that anyone patient enough and
with sufficient cross referencing and study of the diagrams will be able to follow the mathematical
arguments reproduced here regardless of their level of mathematical training.

The good news is that there will be pictures. Wherever there is alot of math there 
should be a picture that captures, schematically, the essential ideas which are being discussed. 
It turns out that for most of materials science the most important pictures always seem to be ones showing you
how atoms are arranged in space, and graphs showing you where a resonance is likely to occur. 
Resonances in the equations are what we relate to experimental probes.
The absorption and emission of light (photoabsorption and photoemission) by materials is how 
we infer details about a materials atomic structure and electronic properties. 
In a strict sense of the words we shine light on materials to try to understand how they work. 

